---
dip: 196
title: On-chain Network Identity
authors: Greg Nazario (@gregnazario)
status: Draft
type: Informational
created: 07/06/2021
last_updated: 08/24/2021
issue: https://github.com/diem/dip/issues/196
---

import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl';

# Summary

Dip-6 defines a method for downstream nodes to learn about validator full nodes and gain access to the Diem network.
In turn, validator full nodes would benefit by being able to distinguish known nodes from unknown nodes.
This DIP describes the ability for node operators to self register their network identity on-chain, and allow other
nodes to lookup this data for discovery of other nodes.  An example use case is the ability for validator node
operators to provide privileged clients prioritized access to validator full nodes.  Validator full nodes can
subscribe to an event stream to learn about changes and determine which nodes to prioritize.

# Specification

## On-chain Network Identity Format

The identities shall be a vector of [BCS](https://github.com/diem/bcs) encoded `NetworkIdentity` objects.
However, the vector shall be a set, and any duplicates will be ignored.
```
{
  identities: vector<vector<u8>>,
}
```

The `NetworkIdentity` struct shall be a tuple of `peer_id` and a x25519 `public_key` that represents the identity
for a single node.
```
{
    peer_id: <account_address>,
    public_key: <base64 encoded x25519 public key>,
}
```

## Updating Network Identity - operator

The `NetworkIdentity` for an account shall be updated by only the operator of the account.  At this point, the
consumers of this identity must update their local use of identity within a reasonable amount of time.

## Consuming Network Identity

Consumers of `NetworkIdentity` may keep track of a list of accounts to watch.  The consumers then can watch the
event streams of each account's `NetworkIdentity` for updates and update accordingly.

```
struct NetworkIdentityChangeNotification {
    account: address,
    identities: vector<vector<u8>>,
    time_rotated_seconds: u64,
}

struct Identity {
   peer_id: PeerId,
   public_keys: Vec<x25519::PublicKey>,
}
```

# Backwards Compatibility

As this only applies to discovery of future nodes, there are no concerns for backwards compatibility.  The onchain
identity for VFNs work with already existing prioritzation in connection limiting for the network.  Additionally,
rate limiting can use this information for prioritization.

# Copyright Notice

This documentation is made available under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) license
(available at https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
