---
dip: 201
title: 2-chain DiemBFT
authors: Zekun Li (@zekun000)
status: Draft
type: Standard
created: 08/09/2021
last updated: 09/09/2021
issue: https://github.com/diem/dip/issues/201
---

# Summary

This DIP describes a major latency improvement - 2-chain commit rule instead of 3-chain - as described in  [DiemBFT-V4](./DiemBFT-V4.pdf).

# Abstract

Currently, DiemBFT inherits the 3-chain commit rules from [HotStuff](https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3293611.3331591) to achieve both communication efficiency and optimistic responsiveness during leader replacement. Two important observations led us to move to a 2-chain commit rule. First, during **successful** leader terms, a leader can be replaced with a 2-chain commit while maintaining the good properties of 3-chain commits. Second, if a leader term is **unsuccessful**, timeout messages and round synchronization in DiemBFT already incur a higher communication cost and a delay. Indeed, our research shows that we can use a 2-chain commit rule with a minor increase in communication overhead when validators time out of a consensus round.

We only discuss engineering impact and omit the theoretical analysis from this DIP. Readers are encouraged to read the full [whitepaper](./DiemBFT-V4.pdf).

# Required Changes

## Types
In order to provide safety under a 2-chain protocol, two new timeout related structs are added to represent the highest quorum certificate the validator node has when it times out of a round.

```rust
pub struct TwoChainTimeout {
    /// Epoch number corresponds to the set of validators that are active for this round.
    epoch: u64,
    /// The consensus protocol executes proposals (blocks) in rounds, which monotonically increase per epoch.
    round: Round,
    /// The highest quorum cert the signer has seen.
    quorum_cert: QuorumCert,
}
pub struct TwoChainTimeoutCertificate {
    timeout: TwoChainTimeout,
    signatures: BTreeMap<Author, (Round, Ed25519Signature)>,
}
```

TwoChainTimeoutCertificate only carries a single quorum cert instead of 2f+1 as an optimization to save both bandwidth and verification cost.
It keeps the TwoChainTimeout with the highest quorum cert and the signature is signed on the derived struct
```rust
pub struct TimeoutSigningRepr {
    pub epoch: u64,
    pub round: Round,
    pub hqc_round: Round,
}
```

## Rules
The [Safety Rules](https://github.com/diem/diem/tree/main/consensus/safety-rules) code has been changed accordingly and the proofs of safety and liveness are in the [whitepaper](./DiemBFT-V4.pdf).

Voting Rule:
1. block.round > last vote round
2. block.round == block.qc.round + 1 || (block.round == tc.round + 1 && block.qc.round >= tc.highest_hqc_round)

Timeout Rule:
1. round >= last vote round
2. (round == qc.round + 1 || round == tc.round + 1) && qc.round >= 1-chain round

Commit Rule:
 - It's safe to commit block B if there exist a 2-chain B <- QC <- B' <- QC  such that B'.round == B.round + 1.

## Upgrade
Switching from existing DiemBFT to the new version requires reconfiguration. An on-chain consensus config will be added to support the transition from 3-chain to 2-chain at an epoch boundary. 
We also switch from [BCS](https://github.com/diem/bcs) to a backward compatible wire protocol (JSON) to simplify migrating data structures.

## Testing plan
All consensus protocol changes must be thoroughly audited, proven, and tested since they are the foundation of safety and liveness of the blockchain. The current plan includes:
1. Validate protocol and proof 
2. Enable in all testing environment
3. Add fault injection
4. Stress test the reconfiguration switch
5. Go through regular release pipeline

## Client

This change is client agnostic, other than an observable improvement in commit latency improvement due to that LedgerInfo which encapsulates the commit rule.
